Her family was threatening to sue A&M, and I remember in the paperwork, among the questions she had been asked was, how long have you wanted to be a veterinarian?
And she, according to the notes, paused and said, well, two or three months.
Had she ever been responsible for caring for an animal?
She thought that when she was in the first grade, they had had a cat or a dog for a few months.
Then did she have any association with a veterinarian of any sort?
She thought she knew where one had an office, but she'd never met it.
And as I recall, what she was told was,
You prove to us within the next year that you really are interested in veterinary medicine.
This is not a passing fancy, and we will guarantee you admission.
They threatened to sue.
Instead, though, she went back to UT and did her master's degree in biochemistry and went on.
I'm assuming that's not an unusual situation with some.
Back to the real world.
As you began to dig in deeply into this college and the department and so forth, how did you, when you arrived, compare our facilities and physical facilities with those you had left at Minnesota?
How did this?
The facilities here were basically two-story building with offices on second floor and labs primarily in the first floor and a couple of very, very large lecture halls.
My class had 56 students in it.
So I came to a school that had 128 students per class.
I was not used to that number of students around.
But it also had a faculty and a facility that could support that number of students.
So the emphasis at that time, too, was teaching.
Yes, you did some research, and that's important, and it always has been, but the students were the primary reason we were here.
In Minnesota, the same was true, although we saw a little bit more emphasis on research.
We had a strong tie with the Minneapolis health science complex, their medical school there.
There was no medical school here, and so that
relationship did not exist.
The faculty at Minnesota, when I look back on them, were famous people.
I didn't know it.
The faculty here were not well known outside of the state of Texas.
That has certainly changed over time.
The quality of education
I think at almost any of the veterinary schools in the country at that time was probably pretty much the same.
They might be a little bit better in pathology or in small animal or in large animal or whatever, but the overall education was probably pretty much the same.
As I've watched the faculty grow,
because of additional demands put on them over time.
I've watched the change in faculty.
And it changes somewhat by department, and that's a reflection of department heads, as would be appropriate.
They bring in the type of people that have the types of interests that they want to promote.
I will say that if I look at the anatomy and now anatomy public health department, the emphasis has strongly changed from the education to the research.
In the small animal department,
While there is definitely an added interest in the research component, every single faculty member has a strong, strong commitment to teaching the student and will spend much more time on the floor with the students than occurs in some of the institutions that we are often compared to.
When you, in your first years down here, did anyone from Minnesota ever give you any hint of what they thought of this school's qualities?
I never knew of anyone from Texas A&M at Minnesota.
No, but did any Minnesota person ever.
They didn't know much about Texas A&M either.
We were an unknown entity.
And yet, if you go out today and you look at papers presented on teaching, research, growth within specialty areas,
It's always Texas A&M at the top.
More papers, more faculty, more presence in organized veterinary medicine and research aspects of veterinary medicine and specialty areas of veterinary medicine.
Right now, how, who, how, why did that change?
It changed because of the commitment of the faculty here.
Did somebody encourage that?
Of course, department heads and deans, I think probably starting with George Shelton and the department heads he brought in, at a time when the state had a very strong commitment to veterinary education from a funding standpoint,
We were encouraged to go to and be part of organized veterinary medicine.
That meant we went out to meetings.
Because we were there, suddenly A&M was recognized.
Because of the quality of people we had here, we became leaders within organized veterinary medicine.
We became the people who presented the CE.
We became the people who were the officers.
And that was okay.
We were allowed to do that.
And we developed a reputation of
really being good teachers, which we knew we always were, but now we had the opportunity to go out and spread that word.
And because of that then, we were able to draw and attract high-quality new faculty, high-quality residents and interns.
And that allowed us to still go out because now we had the reputation.
Well, call Dr. Beaver, call Dr. Wolf, call Dr. Willard, call Dr. Lees, call Dr. whoever.
because we now we have that reputation and are allowed to continue that reputation right in your in your specialty uh where do you think we running nationally number one who else is competitive there are 23 board certified veterinary behaviors in the world
There are seven residency programs in the US in behavior.
One of them is at A&M.
One of those 23.
She happens to have been the first president.
She happens to be the executive director.
Her name keeps
being out there.
So people think of A&M as one of the first places when they think of animal behavior.
Who else, though, is becoming competitive?
Well, the University of California at Davis has several residency programs in behavior.
And they have two, and soon they hope to be three, board-certified behaviorists.
Cornell has a well-identified program.
Pennsylvania certainly has an outstanding program.
They have the advantage.
They're in a big city.
They've got the animals that can come in.
We've got people that have to drive from Houston, Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, Oklahoma, Louisiana, New Mexico, but they come.
On that one, as a kind of curiosity, give some examples of people that came from extreme distances to bring their animal.
The furthest I've had was Connecticut.
They had an Irish wolfhound that was biting people.
They started down the East Coast.
It was a couple that would show dogs occasionally, wolfhounds, and they had a retired couple that had a motorhome.
They drove down the East Coast.
They stopped at the University of Florida to see if they could help them.
The University of Florida said, you need to see Dr. Beaver at Texas A&M.
They started across the Gulf Coast states.
They stopped at Louisiana.
LSU folks said, you got to see Dr. Beaver at Texas A&M.
So they kept on coming.
And we could at least describe the why the dog had it.
There isn't a lot we could do in that particular situation, but we could describe it.
I think of one that came down from Wichita Falls with a German Shepherd, a relatively young adult dog, about a year, year and a half of age.
And the complaint was the dog was excessively shy.
And the dog would hide under, in fact, when I went out to get them in the waiting room, the dog was hiding under the lady's chair.
Well, this was not desirable because this was supposed to be an obedience champion and they couldn't even get it into an obedience class, much less an obedience ring.
So we got to talking to her and this is one of these intuitive things which I think I got from my mother.
There's something in the power of observations.
It was one of the first, not the first, cases that I had, where in watching the dog in the exam room, I noticed the dog was extremely observant, constantly monitoring everything that was going on.
And I said, there's something besides shyness in this dog.
And we decided to treat it like a hyper dog.
And by the next day, the veterinarian, she put it on certain drugs,
sent it home.
The veterinarian called me the next day and said, I don't know what you did, but you worked a miracle.
The dog is no longer shy.
It is outgoing.
I had a few little things that we could adjust and fine tune, but it would totally change this dog.
Since that time, we have actually refined hyperactive hyperkinesis in animals, dogs primarily, better than is understood in human medicine.
All right, now as you start developing this specialty, what were some of the key achievements, the key steps?
When did you first, first big project or first big publication,
First publication would have been in the early 70s, right around the same time that the people in Harlingen had asked for the, because I thought, well, I can write on that.
So I'd write for like the Southwestern Veterinarian, which was the student publication at that time.
And it just kind of progressed from then on.
So the first step, I guess, was being allowed to, and going and giving some CE programs in behavior.
The next big step, I think, was getting the hospital appointment so that I could see cases coming into the hospital.
Even though I was on the anatomy faculty, we were allowed to do that.
The next big step was starting an elective for biomedical science students in behavior, which then led to noontime seminars, come if you want to, in animal behavior and human-animal bond.
Which then led to an elective course for veterinary students in animal behavior.
Which then eventually led to putting a behavior course, one credit, but it was a course required in the core curriculum for the veterinary students.
And then that eventually led to
This is a veterinary subject.
We're going to take it out of the biomedical science.
We're going to leave it in veterinary medicine.
Plus, now students could see cases with me coming into the clinic.
I was moved over to the clinic.
That was a biggie, biggie for me.
Then we went on a downslide because, well, from the core course, the core course and elective courses were taught.
Approximately six years, about six years ago, the curriculum was changed again.
You know, every six years you change curriculum.
Well, at that point in time, they decided that the important stuff would go into major core courses and they took animal behavior out as a required course.
I said fine, if the faculty says that it's not good enough to be, it's not important enough to be core, I'll take it out.
We don't need an elective either.
So there were two classes of students that went through without any behavior.
And I took the stand that
It needs to be core.
I'm not going backwards in this progress.
It's going to be core.
So we have now reinstituted some, not, it isn't as a specific course, but we're allowing some lectures on it.
So with that then I put back in the electives.
Who deserves the greatest credit for being supportive of your efforts?
Which dean's department?
The greatest support absolutely was George Shelton.
No question at all.
Racists, very important in that.
The department heads in Small Animal, Bob Plater had just gone off.
Bob was a good friend for a long time, but he was supportive in allowing me to come over and see those cases.
Ken Knauer as an interim, then John August, wonderful support there, and certainly David Williams now as the current head.
Were there any important research grant givers that were helpful?
Bless every dollar I got from every group that I could get it.
It's never been a big dollar research thing, except the biggest one that I will say and consistently has been a man named Dan Christian, Dr. Dan Christian, who's a veterinarian, the veterinarian at first, now there are two, with Frisky's Pet Care Company.
And Frisky's Pet Care has supported the residency program in behavior now.
They're just starting their fifth year of support.
That has been a tremendous boon, not only to the department and the college, but also to the discipline as a whole.
Now, was there any publication that was kind of the big breakthrough nationally?
Well, the first one, the one that you remember is your first book.
Yeah.
Now, my first books were actually anatomy books, but my first behavior book was published in 1980 by Mosby, big publisher.
They had come and asked, would you do a book on cat behavior?
And I was foolish enough to say, yes, not knowing.
Well, at first they kind of wanted a dog, and I said, you know how much literature there is out there?
Well, what I didn't realize is there's more in the cat than there is in the dog, at least science literature, because the cat was a model for neurological studies.
So all this brain stuff is out there with the cats.
So I did that.
That led to...
Two more books plus a revision of the cat one.
And the cat one's just gone into the, will be going into the third edition.
I'm working on that revision right now.
So from a behavior standpoint, that first cat book.
And it was a wonderful experience because I could sit down and go through each subject in detail at the library.
And I was, that's when I learned how much stuff is in our library.
I was so impressed.
I thought there was nothing over there.
There was beaucoup's of stuff.
And going through that and sitting down and really learning and then having the good fortune at that time, Dr. Sissett had two people in, one whose primary purpose was to read.
She was an English major.
And she read.
And she would go through manuscripts.
with a fine tooth comb, read them backward and forward and say, this sentence doesn't make sense.
That's paragraph.
What do you mean by that?
It was wonderful.
It became an extremely clear document when it was done.
And I thank him forever for doing that.
This has nothing to do with our interview, and the typist doesn't need to include this.
One of my small little efforts has been to try to get the press and veterinary medicine together, the NM Press.
Iowa State has a very good series in veterinary medicine and their press.
One of my books is with Iowa State Press.
Two of my books are with Iowa State Press, actually.
I argue that all university presses ought to have at least two kinds of areas of emphasis.
One of books about the region where that institution is located.
We do that.
The other would be in the disciplines for which that institution is well known.
All right, we haven't done much in our press on agriculture or veterinary medicine.
Well, and we're moving in both directions, I think, now.
Let's see.
Either early, middle, or late, did anybody ever give you advice about being a faculty member at Texas A&M?
No.
nobody said no do or not to do or the the the testing procedures was trial by fire and looking at people like Arden Kimmler and some of those looking back on it I think there were kinder and gentler ways to do it but that was the way it was done in that era
But it was a growing process, so it's part of my learning process as well.
Testing is such a fallacy anyway.
It's how do you evaluate students?
There isn't a good answer for that.
And how do you mentor young faculty?
Nowadays, we often are assigned or pick somebody to be your mentor.
I hope it's helpful, and I really do worry about young people coming in on faculty.
We actually have, it's very difficult, particularly in clinical sciences, to attract new faculty.
And while a position in, let's say, wildlife science may attract, heck, 100 applicants, we're lucky to have one.
And part of the reason is the economics of it, because specialists now, which is what we require as board certification, can make so much more in private practice with four and a half day weeks, with state of the art equipment to back them up, we can't even begin
And then you bring them in, and you not only throw them into, you've got to do your specialty and do it well, but you've got to teach students.
So you're going to have somebody at your elbow 12 hours a day.
And you've got to cover emergencies.
And you've got to go into the classroom and teach.
And you've got to have a great big, big dollar research program.
And by the way, we've got a whole bunch of committees we need to put you on.
I'm real concerned about where veterinary medicine is going to get quality teachers.
As far as you know, those realities here are no different from the other top-notch vet schools.
That's correct.
They're the same.
Did you have any kind of role model faculty colleagues that you selected yourself that, okay, I'll kind of try to
watch them and pattern my efforts after.
There were a lot of people that I would take bits and pieces from.
One of my great pleasures this past year, the award hasn't been given, but it will be.
was actually an ambulatory clinician at Minnesota who, unbeknownst to him, really became a role model on compassion and humane care for animals.
Other people would serve as role models for how to give a test.
My mother was a role model on being a teacher and
how to get out and be a teacher, be the thespian that a teacher has to be.
Others have been role models in how to work with clients.
So a lot of people have been important.
I didn't have the women ahead of me to say, that's what I need to be.
I was smart enough to realize that there were those coming behind me that were going to watch.
Now, whether I will be judged as having been a good role model, that I don't know.
History will say.
But I at least understood that I had that obligation to the next generation.
And during, you've been here now 30?
31 years.
During those 31 years, has any one faculty member or administrator come to you and ever said, uh-uh, a woman doesn't do that?
No.
Do you feel, as you look back on your years here, that you were treated with relative equity compared to the men?
You weren't?
Give them some... Twice.
On record.
And all you have to do is check the salaries.
The approximately my second or third year here,
I went over, as we were often advised, to go look at the salary book over in the library.
I did that.
Back before salaries were public.
They were public, they were published.
But I mean, they weren't available in the department as they would be now.
Oh, I don't even know if they are now.
But I did that, and I was shocked to find that a faculty member that came at the same time, but had one less year experience, in other words, a new graduate, was getting more than I was.
And so I confronted, being ignorant, I confronted my department head and said, why?
He said, well, he has family.
his family to support his wife isn't working he's got small children I said excuse me what happens if something happens to me if something happens to him she can go to work something happens to me I'm stuck so that was one time that was equaled out the next year the right so you're saying that that that inequity was corrected yes then
Several years later, after I had moved over into the Department of Small Animal Medicine Surgery, there was a legal action where salaries discrepancies from the past were corrected.
And so I know that there had been discrimination in the past.
But those are the only, that's the only kind of blatant discrimination that I was bright enough to understand.
If others existed, I don't know.
Because I always took the, I'm going to do what I enjoy.
I enjoy the people.
I enjoy where I am.
I enjoy what I do.
And in terms of promotions, you feel that you were treated?
I was treated very fairly.
Okay.
Let's see.
You mentioned the library.
The library and the labs and so forth here, relatively high quality?
A&M has facilities, including libraries and labs, that I will say are second to none.
We've had times where they need upgrading.
The large animal facility is an example of that.
But it wasn't because it wasn't workable and doable.
But with that said,
I don't care what kind of facilities you have.
It's the faculty that drive learning.
If you don't have a good faculty, that's when the student suffers.
And we have always had a good faculty.
Can you recall any, I'll call it, gender-related events in a class or in a departmental meeting?
Yes.
Share some, please.
Well, first of all, being introduced to the faculty is integrating the faculty.
That will forever stand out in my mind.
And I probably should have taken it negatively at the beginning, but I thought it was funny, and I really enjoy it.
To me, it's kind of been a highlight.
The other thing was I was very active for several years with the American Cancer Society, the local chapter.
And the first year they had their Kiss Me, I Don't Smoke campaign, their anti-smoking campaign, they had a little badge that was a frog, and it said, Kiss Me, I Don't Smoke.
So on the Great American Smokeout Day, I wore that badge to lab.
Well, we came back from a break, and there was a lineup of there must have been 30 of the male students standing in line waiting.
I thought, this is great.
And were they smiling?
You bet they were.
They would also every so often, particularly when we got into the reproductive systems, there would be a few snide comments or attempts to put one over on the hair professor.
Now, in the history department, we heard occasionally of some anecdotes as coeducation became a reality over here on this side of the tracks of some of the good old boy faculty members that had to change some of their stories and some of their anecdotes that no longer would those work.
Did you become an advisor to some female veterinary students?
Did sometimes they come to you for advice and counsel?
The female students, particularly in the early years, always sought me out because I was the only woman that they could talk to.
And there were a lot of times boyfriend troubles, health problems, problems at home.
The worst thing, and well, they would seek me out.
Now, in general, I can say I was thinking back, brought back some memories on the worst thing that I
ever had happened as a faculty member was I was in charge of the gross anatomy lab, large animal anatomy.
I had gotten a call from the dean's office.
I found out that one of the students in that class had committed suicide and they had just found out about it and I had to make the announcement to that class.
That is a real heartbreaker to lose any of those high quality people like that.
And then you start, then you get the, okay, let's talk through it.
Let's talk about it and find out he had been a loner and a lot of kinds of things.
Maybe it could have been seen coming and apparently it probably should have been seen coming, but there probably again would have been nothing anyone could have done.
Did any of the women, the female vet students, come to you for advice about the profession?
Yes.
Normally, what were their concerns?
They wanted to know, could women have families and be veterinarians?